Lloyd affected that whole idea, cultivated it.
The way he wore his clothes and things caused people.
Some people call him high pockets.
Another thing he had was high pockets because he wore his pants so short.
One thing I think the reason why Dr. Nance was always kind of in awe of Lloyd because Lloyd spoke two or three languages and Dr. Nance was an old farm boy and Lloyd was
from Ivy League school and spoke two or three languages and came from an old family.
And Dr. Nance appreciated it, I think, along the way.
And don't I remember occasionally Lloyd would name drop of some Eastern families that he knew?
Oh, yes.
He double dated with Jacqueline Kennedy one time.
He made a great point to let you know that he had known a lot of people like that then, yes.
And he knew all about French wines and cuisine.
Yes, good food.
He ate the Texans once a week.
They frequently, which was a great restaurant in College Station Bryan, and they frequently tried out new recipes on him.
Now he lived where?
On Church Street in a one-room apartment with a bathroom off the side.
The light was a single light bulb hanging down from the ceiling, and that was it.
And he, in his office, I remember he had succulents.
He raised succulents.
He collected paintings, and he collected women.
Lloyd wrote about women, and his books were all on females.
And he was a great collector of female painters.
In fact, he had some very famous paintings.
One of his paintings, a Peggy Bacon painting, was actually in the Smithsonian.
They came, I remember very clearly, they came down, boxed that thing, and shipped it up to Washington where it went on display for a while.
One of those paintings is in the dean's office now, a very famous one.
Describe what you remember about his death.
Lloyd was out, I saw Lloyd, I was getting ready to go to a book signing.
There was a book signing.
When you get ready to do something like that you can't remember names then.
Our future president from Rice.
Oh Frank Vandiver.
Frank Vandiver was having a book signing over in the old board house.
Wardlaw was there and I was walking over that because I had Black Jack Pershing the book, two volumes, and so I was going to walk over and have him sign that for me.
And I was walking out the hall and I saw Lloyd and I waved at him.
And he was getting ready to go run as he was wanting to do in the afternoon.
And I went on to my meeting.
And that night, I forget exactly what time it was, but it was fairly late, 910 o'clock.
Keith Bryant was our head at that time.
And I received a phone call from Keith Bryant telling me that Lloyd Taylor had died.
He was out jogging on the track at that time in the Coliseum there, Kyle Field.
And he evidently fell over.
And when he was found he was still alive, they rushed him to the hospital, but he died.
The Nina Harris or Nina Harris Ashcraft was at the hospital at the time and she was there after it all happened.
And as far as I understand, they never knew why he had died.
Nina thought it was probably a heart attack.
But some people thought it was a stroke and.
He was in his 50s?
50s, uh-huh, yeah.
Middle 50s.
In hindsight, he may have consumed a little too much alcohol.
He was a very heavy drinker.
And one reason why he ran, he drank every day.
And he ran, he would tell you that, he ran to keep himself clean.
And Lloyd was always very red faced, if you remember that then.
But he did not smoke as far as.
Did not smoke.
smoked very much anyway he didn't smoke and he ran every day and he looked in fit condition if you remember he didn't have an ounce of fat on him that most of us even had some by that time he ran every day and he ran a long way every day I don't remember do you remember any other tragedies in the department yes we had a
The, the, you know, the individual who died in his office, and I cannot remember his name now.
You were still here.
His office was down there on the west, on the east end of the building, on the curve there, and he was brought in to teach Latin America.
He was only here for a couple years, and he died in his office.
Yes, okay.
And we, by that time, we were in, we were still in Nagle Hall.
By that time, the dean had moved out to academic, and we had taken over the center.
I remember very clearly Dr. Nance coming into the center office there and calling his wife and I do not remember his name.
He was only here for a short time.
And that's a, and then of course Al Ashcraft had a stroke in his office.
We're not really sure what it was.
No one ever knew.
He had a stroke or a heart attack in his office and he was taken to the hospital.
Hill was head then.
He was taken to the hospital.
Al was retiring that summer.
He was getting ready to start his last
semester, and he had the attack there.
He never recovered from it.
He recovered very briefly, then deteriorated.
And that's all I can remember now.
All right.
Let's jump back to the 60s and the changes at A&M, the proposals for women and non-compulsory corps and so forth.
What did you and your faculty colleagues think about those prospective changes at A&M?
As far as I know, all faculty members were in favor of letting women in.
And all faculty members, as far as I know, were against the Corps being compulsory.
And even Al Ashcraft, who had been in the Corps and was an old Aggie, Alan thought it should be non-compulsory.
What about racial integration?
Everyone thought that would take place.
I don't remember ever hearing anybody argue on that one.
No.
In fact, you could argue that racial integration was easier than women.
After all, they were boys, you know, even let in, and girls were a bigger issue than letting black males in.
And admission requirements.
Well, most faculty members believe they should be raised.
At that time, I don't know what they were, but we were letting, I think, if you were, whatever percentage you were of your high school class, it really didn't make any difference what you made on any scores on any exams that you could get in.
And we all, we were failing so many students, and we were letting some students in that shouldn't be in.
It must have been terrible to their egos that we all thought that admissions should be raised.
Once you started teaching advanced courses, what about the quality of the students that survived and made it to those courses?
Oh, much better.
105, 106 were required, and gosh, you know, some of those students were just really, in fact, you could see the difference in 105, 106.
106 students were better than 105 because if they had run the gantlet and gotten through 105, they were much better for 106 because 105 did a lot of weeding out and got rather very worse.
In those early years, how much time did, among freshmen, did bonfire work consume?
I don't think freshmen spent that much time on it.
Certainly the upperclassmen spent a great deal of time.
But I don't really know how much time freshmen spend looking back on it.
And of course, in those days, we had lots of mixed people.
We didn't have all freshmen in 105, 106.
Engineering put it off even in those days.
And so you had even your 105, 106, you had a lot of upperclassmen from the very beginning in there.
So I'm not really sure how much time freshmen were using for 105.
In that era, what majors on the campus were supposedly the toughest and the easiest?
Well, I used to have, we used to talk about how bad some of the architectural students were and they were, some of those were pretty bad.
I'm not sure I could make anything on, I had both good and bad engineering students, had some very good engineering students and some very bad engineering students.
Meteorology and oceanography students I thought on the whole were pretty good if I remember correctly.
They, I don't remember any bad ones sticking out so much.
Was there a major that supposedly anybody could pass?
Well, of course, in those days, everyone talked about—that's before we had the—well, that's before Parks and Recreation came in, and Parks and Recreation became—but in those days, people talked about majoring in sociology.
And those courses were considered very easy.
And also then in those days, most of your football players were going to be physical education majors.
But that changed somewhat.
And physical education tightened up to state requirements.
All of a sudden they had to start taking chemistry and things like that then.
And so then that's when the
when the Parks and Recreation came in and wildlife was never one of them.
People always think about wildlife was easy.
Wildlife required biology and chemistry, things like that.
It was never considered an easy one.
As coeducation began, can you recall any classroom realities about women being in your classes?
Yes.
A number of times I had to speak rather sternly and very harshly to some students to make sure that they were not doing things they shouldn't be doing.
But on the whole, really, there was very little overt.
action towards the girls.
I'm sure there were some otherwise, you know, but most of the time it was not.
And once in a while you would have girls complaining, but the worst complaint I had one time was a young lady who came up to me almost in tears complaining about the guys in back and I was ready just to jump up and become furious and pound people to death.
and she was upset because they were chewing tobacco in the back and they were spitting it and she had on white boots and someone had splashed her white boots with tobacco and she was very upset and I felt so relieved because I thought maybe we had some guys back there but we had a few instances where guys did things they should not be doing.
Can you share some of those?
Well you know using vulgar words and making remarks to girls and I had a
And those were short skirts in those days.
In a period, they were wearing very short skirts.
And some young ladies, all they wore were short skirts.
And that's when pantyhose came in.
And some of them seemed to think that pantyhose covered everything.
And so some of them just revealed a great deal.
And guys were talking about that then as well.
The Corps always tried to keep classes from getting, in any way, confrontation.
And so, when, thank God, class, there was one thing nice about the Corps.
The Corps kind of maintained control.
I remember very clearly one of my colleagues' wife was in my class, and Marty Calvert, and we were very, very good friends.
And she would needle me in class, and I would speak back to her.
And one day she was leaving class and she looked up and there were three or four of these corps guys, some of them boots on.
They said, Letty, what are you trying to do to us?
She said, what?
She said, you're trying to get this guy mad at us?
Calm it, cool it, quit all that stuff on him.
And she just died laughing, you know.
And so the very next class time, we really went at it.
And all of a sudden they finally realized that I knew her, you know.
And so we all kind of died down.
But they were very concerned that she was going to, they felt I would take action against all of the whole class because of her activities.
And then in a few years, what could you conclude about the effects of the admission of women?
What did that really mean?
Well, there's an old saying, go, women civilized, and I think there's some truth in that.
When I first came here, the Tessas used to come down and give the boys lectures on how to act on dates and how to be gentlemen and things like that, if you remember, from Denton.
Well, TSCW, well, that was discontinued as we had our own girls, our own women, and I think the classes got...
Well, for a long time there were remarks made and you always had a few guys in class who made remarks.
But I think they became fewer and fewer as there were more and more girls in there.
And you can certainly say that the girls being admitted probably took the place of a lot of guys who should have been there.
And I think the quality of students improved a lot because the girls who wanted to come
And that's not saying I didn't fail girls, because I certainly did.
I didn't fail females, because I had bad female students.
But I think we had, on the whole, better students probably.
Did you have any incident you can recall relating to racial integration?
No.
Blacks came in.
There were blacks.
I did not that I can recall.
Did you ever hear of any?
I didn't.
No, I never heard of anything in class.
You hear about it from other people, but I never had it in class.
And blacks came in, took their seats, and I became friends with some of them, and I did not know some of them, really.
And several of the blacks I'm still friends with, I had in class a long time ago.
So, you know, it's one of those things that probably things happen that you didn't know about.
Black students, I had some good ones and I had some very bad ones, but that's true of whites as well.
Did any black student ever come to you to
share any problem they had encountered?
No, I never had a black student come to me and talk about any problems they had in class.
But on the other hand, by the time blacks were coming in class, I handed out my syllabus by that time, and my syllabus spelled out very clearly that I would not tolerate any type of that sort of thing, that you were all Aggies and acted ladies and gentlemen and so forth.
So I made it pretty clear that I would not allow it, and that may have headed some of it off,
Now, you heard stories from other people about things happen to them, but never in my classes.
And nothing relating to Hispanics or Jews or international?
No, well, of course, I think Hispanics had been accepted for a long time, and I didn't know who Jews were most of the time, you know.
And did you have many international students in those?
You had a few, but we went then, of course, we went to teaching international students separately, and I taught international students several times.
Oh, describe.
What was different about that?
It was way different because 105, 106, we got where we were teaching them in separate classes.
We discovered they simply were at a disadvantage.
The classes were originally set up for a language barrier.
One time I had a Jew in there from Israel.
Well, he spoke better English than I did, you know.
He had better syntax than I had.
He didn't belong in there, but his background was such that he was taking the course.
They were wild sometimes.
because, and I'm not using any groups again, but some of those people, looking on some of those papers was not cheating.
It was just simply the way you did things from their home.
And you really had to keep your eyes peeled in those classes because you could have cheating wholesale.
And the students in those classes varied from being very good to being very, very bad.
And I found them not much different otherwise.
You had those eagerly learning.
And what we did is we simplified things.
We cut out most minor figures.
We were concerned they learned the President of the United States, the important people, and the important issues.
And we didn't give them any minutia or any lesser people.
We didn't care whether they knew the Secretaries of State or not unless they were a very important Secretary of State then.
That's good.
Were there, did any of those international students ever argue about their having to take this U.S.
history?
Oh, yes.
They never thought it was fair.
And I think now a lot of those international students take that in blend.
We have fewer and fewer of them because most of them are taking it in blend, where they conceive it to be easier.
Now, whether it is easier or not, I don't know.
But they conceive it to be easier, and so most of them, we have fewer and fewer of those people taking it now.
As far as the, you recall the reputation among the students, who were supposedly the toughest graders in the history department and who were supposedly the easiest?
Well, I know I was considered to be tough grader.
A number of people who were considered real tough in those days, like Stuart Coughlin, who was considered to be very, very tough left.
I'm trying to think now.
Lloyd Tedder was considered to be very tough, tough grader.
I think you were considered to be kind of a tough grader.
Herb was not considered to be a tough grader.
Who was supposed to be easy, if any?
Oh gosh.
It's hard for me to remember now.
I'm trying to think about that now.
Many of those left, and so they're no longer there.
I think Al Asker was considered to be kind of an easy grader, but I don't think that was necessarily the case.
Al was a good teacher and he presented it to him, but he was considered to be kind of easy.
I think Duncan was considered to be kind of, oh, and Nancy was considered to be a very hard grader.
Duncan was considered to be kind of an easy grader, and I think Tom Miller, at times, people thought that he was not a hard grader.
Then in political science, Jack Woods, no, he wasn't.
He came a little later.
He was not at the beginning.
No, who was the guy that was, was it Jock Woods?
Who was supposed to be easy with athletes?
Oh, yeah, that was Wood, I think, yeah.
He was a lawyer.
He was an attorney.
Yeah, that if you were an athlete, supposedly you could pass his court.
You couldn't get an A, but supposedly you could pass.
And Gene Benton was considered to be terribly hard, yeah.
Blue Book Benton.
Describe him.
Benton loved to teach and was probably a much better researcher than he was a teacher.
He would walk in the classroom and sit down, open up the textbook, and read from it.
He actually read from, he didn't allow any questions in class.
His exams came strictly from the textbook.
And as far as I know, he added hardly anything at all ad-libbing other than what the textbook did.
And he wrote, helped to write with the textbooks, and so frequently he was reading from his own textbooks.
Why was he called Blue Book Benton?
Oh, because he had those blue books, and they had to take those blue books, and they better fill them up.
And as the old saying goes, it didn't really make much of what you said as long as you said a lot of it along the way.
Benton was a very nice man.
He was a good colleague.
And highly regarded across the state.
Yes.
He was a good researcher.
He'd written a number of books on a variety of topics, but he just simply, he never had any eye contact.
He never looked at students.
You could go in and talk to him in his office and evidently, if you went into his office, he was more relaxed.
But in the classroom, he was very formal.
He and Nance were much alike, I think.
I think that he was, I think that Benton was more extreme than Nance was in that sense.
But if you, one-on-one, Benton was really a nice guy.
All right, then in the early 70s, Dr. Nance left the department headship.
Yes.
As far as you know, was that of his decision or not?
I gather, I always kind of thought he was forced out, kind of.
I always gathered that there was pressure on him to resign.
He and Rudder were pretty good friends.
And when Rudder died, and within our department, as you know, there was some considerable opposition to Dr. Nance in many ways.
And I think that probably there was pressure on him.
Then what was the process?
I was not aware of it, by the way.
I was not one of the inside groups, so I can't say that.
What was the relationship with the, I mean, the process for the new department head selection?
Well, when we came out, we said Nashville was going to step down.
We had a full, there was a committee formed, and I don't remember who's on the committee now, and we had a full departmental.
participation, which surprised a lot of people.
We were still in Nagel when that whole process began, and we were going to move into academic there about that same time.
And Dave Maxwell would have been dean by then.
Maxwell was dean by that time, and it was a fairly open process.
Someone like Herb Lang would remember more clearly probably.
Now who was the selectee?
Who was the new?
Bryson Gooch.
We interviewed several people.
Actually, there was one, there was a fellow from, I don't remember his name now, from New York, one of the New York schools that I've kind of liked.
But he, Gooch becomes a selectee, and I'm not sure really how that was.
And he came highly recommended to the Corps.
From Oklahoma?
Oklahoma University, Oklahoma, yes.
Describe him in his department.
He was a well-known, Gooch was a well-known French historian and came highly recommended.
And he'd done all kinds of work.
And he came to A&M, and some people say he retired when he came to A&M.
He was a department head.
He was not nearly as...
demanding as Nats had been.
It was more relaxed when he came in.
In fact, it was fairly relaxed.
If you did things and didn't get in the way, then Gooch didn't bother you, really.
All right.
Now, did he operate as a chairman or as a department head?
Robert head.
He was a head.
And I'm not sure who he consulted, if he consulted anyone hardly at all then.
Now, under Dr. Nance, there were departmental meetings about how often?
Meaning when?
Not very often.
Once a semester?
I think once a, I think beginning of the semester, something like that then, you know.
Kind of like we had our college meetings.
And they were announcement meetings, weren't they?
Right, mainly announcements.
And what about with Gooch?
There was a little more participation then.
Gooch, there was questions and answers and things like that then.
Gooch allowed arguments and discussions and things like that.
Things were debated.
So there was more.
But on the other hand, if I can remember back to the last meetings with Dr. Nance, that was true too.
So I'm not sure there was that much difference between Nance's last few meetings and Beer and Gooch's.
Because Gooch sought advice
and did as he pleased.
And I think that's a safe state.
In the 60s and 70s, was there anybody in the department who had some departmental responsibilities as advisor, counselor, in addition to Dr. Nance and Gooch?
Hall.
Hall part of that time was advising first graduate students, I think, and then later undergraduates, you know.
And then when Keith Bryant came in, I guess Bayless was undergraduate advisor, then Bonnie Stadelman, then me.
All right.
Gooch was department chairman about, department head about how long?
Seven or eight years, something like that then.
And he got problems, of course, because of Shirley Gooch and marriage and things like that, you know, then.
And did he... It wasn't even seven or eight years, more than four or five years, I guess.
Is that right?
Did he stay on here after ceasing his department head?
Yes.
When he became, when he ceased being department head, he was moved upstairs to Dean's office where he became director of research.
That job had been held by, I forget his name now, another guy, Englishman, who was Englishman, and he became that.
And he was director of research for two or three, four years.
And then he came back down to the department as a faculty member.
Now, by this time, the graduate program is beginning.
Yes.
Do you remember, can you describe how that
got into higher gear?
Well, I think in the early days a large part of our graduate students were people coming back to finish degrees in the summertime, giving a master's degree and PhD people.
Many of our people already had jobs and were simply trying to complete finish things up.
Herb Lang was the advisor in much of that then and was handling most of that and Herb pushed it I think very, very hard to improve it and get better people and things like that then.
Do you remember any particular events relating to the department getting the authority to do a master's degree and then getting to do a PhD?
Not really.
I was a very junior member, and we were giving master's degrees, and I just remember when we submitted the proposal and began doing PhDs then.
And I don't remember any particular... No, I don't either.
...to-do about it.
I think Nance did most of that, probably.
And it went on a kind of a low-key?
Very low-key for a long time, yeah.
All right, then Dr. Gooch is followed by... Keith Bryant.
And he came from Dayton?
No.
He was from Oklahoma.
Where was he?
I don't remember now where he came from.
He came from North someplace, yeah.
Maybe it was Dayton.
He came from all the school because he came down here mainly because he hated shoving snow in his head.
Describe him as the department head.
Well, he was very... Gooch let things slide, and Gooch didn't really care what happened as long as he didn't bother him, and Gooch consulted what he did as he pleased.
Keith was a department head for sure also but I think Keith consulted more.
Keith talked to people like Henry Detloff and I think Herb and people like that.
He talked to them more but he still had and the final decisions he made pretty much along that line you know.
Did, were there any changes in the routine for a typical faculty member?
No, we kept getting shorter.
Fewer courses were cut from 4 to 3 and then from 3 to 2 to 3 and from 2 to 1 in many cases then.
Well, there's more specialization certainly by this time.
In the old days under Nance, he believed you ought to be able to teach anything.
And that was to some extent true under Gooch too.
But under Keith then, we're getting more specialized where you're teaching your specialized courses.
And under Keith, the idea begins to come in that courses don't belong to anybody.
If you took a course and developed it, it was largely thought that that was your course.
For instance, you developed the Old South, that'd be your course.
Herb Lang developed and but beginning under Keith then the idea begins to come in that that courses don't belong to anybody even though you develop the course anybody can teach it in that area and that really comes to real full-blown debates and arguments under Henry Detloff then.
Well were there some incidents where someone thought that the course they expected to teach was going to be taught by someone else?
Yeah for instance Herb
I'm quite sure that one reason why Herb Lang decides to retire is because he got tired of hassling some of it, and you can speak to him, but there were people who thought they should be able to teach the old frontier, or Frontier America, which Herb had taught for years and developed, had a big following in it, and they wanted it.
And so you get a lot of so-called young Turks who think they should be having to teach these cars, or they should be rotated.
I never felt very strongly on that.
Allen and Ashcraft, there are people who thought they should teach the Civil War and Reconstruction.
Allen was not one of those who thought things should be rotated.
He thought, I developed this course as my course and I should be able to keep it.
If you want to teach a second one, okay, offer another course.
It wasn't against that.
If you can fill a course, okay.
All right, so that would imply that people were not recruited because of a special specialization topic.
I don't think, it wasn't until Keith, I think, that we began to recruit.
If you remember, we used to recruit people to teach Western civilization, but they still had to be able to teach American history.
One of the requirements was, can you teach
American history.
If you didn't have a field in American history, we frequently wouldn't even consider hiring you, even though you were being recruited to teach medieval history.
All right, now the department moved from Nagel to where?
To academic.
Where?
Describe those quarters.
We were on the third floor, and our office was there, and then we had office on the fourth floor as well then.
So, occupy the whole third?
Yeah, most of the third, yeah, and part of the fourth.
And back earlier, where had the classes been taught?
Back in the Nagel days,
Most often where were the classes?
Nagel and chemistry and physics.
Nagel and physics.
Most of our classes were in Nagel Hall.
Physics or academic.
Very rarely did we go very far afield.
All right.
Then with the move to academic, where were the classes?
Classes go everywhere then.
We were much bigger.
We're going down to